+++
title = "About Christina"
linkTitle = "About"
+++

Hi, I'm Christina O'Donnell, and I have a deep passion for Computer Science.
From a young age, I've been captivated by computers and the intricacies of how
they work. My journey led me to study Maths and Computer Science at Oxford.
After completing my degree, I worked as a software engineer for six years,
developing a data analytics program. I then decided to take a slightly different
path in my career, to become a Computer Science tutor, allowing me to pursuing
my research interests concurrently. This September (2024), I am excited to be
starting an MSc in Computer Science at Nottingham. I'm hoping that this will be
a step forward toward building a career in research.

While I am still early in my academic career, I have formed initial interests in
the areas of Dependent Type Theory, Functional Programming, Formal Verification,
and Term Graph Rewriting Systems.

If you want to read more, you can visit [my blog](/blog), check out [my
projects](/projects), or learn about my [tutoring](/tutoring).

You can also find me on [GitHub](https://github.com/cdo256), and Mastodon as [@octocurious@functional.cafe](https://functional.cafe/@octocurious).

## Projects
Here are some of my projects I've done over the years. You can find additional
projection on my [GitHub page](https://github.com/cdo256).

*Semantic Graphs* - Conducting research on 'Graphical Pattern Calculus' as a
term rewriting system, and an investigation into formal language, expression,
and variable binding.

*Guix Contributor* - Contributor to [Guix](https://guix.gnu.org)-- the project
to build a fully functional package manger and reproducible operating system in
Scheme.

*Interactive Quantum Tunnelling Simulation* - Created a simulation using
Processing JS, allowing for interactive manipulation of variables. You can see the code and tweak the variables on [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/computer-programming/quantum-tunnelling/5166410192060416). And there's a discussion on this [Reddit thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/physicsgifs/comments/6tm46t/quantum_tunnelling_simulation/).

*Octocurious Blog* - Maintainer a blog with regular posting of technical content.
[Blog source](https://github.com/cdo256/blog), and its
[theme](https://github.com/cdo256/octohugious).

*System hosting* - Running and maintaining multiple Linux servers, self hosting
websites, GitLab, email, DNS, Discourse. Maintaining security policy, updates,
logging, and firewalls.

*Text Editor* - Developed a very text editor for in C, using a gap buffer for
(somewhat) efficient text storage and manipulation. See the code on
[GitHub](https://github.com/cdo256/cdoedit).

*2D Physics Engine* - Made a 2D rigid-body physics engine from scratch in C++,
featuring collision detection, multiple collision points per object pair, and
joint support. It has platform support for Windows and Linux. See the code on
[Github](https://github.com/cdo256/kfighter-physics-engine).
