+++
title = "Reach Clarity in your Computer Science Degree"
author = ["Christina O'Donnell"]
date = 2024-01-02
keywords = ["clarity", [",", "Computer"], "Science", [",", "tutoring"], [",", "degree"]]
linkTitle = "Tutoring"
draft = false
+++

Hi, I'm Christina, and my aim is to give you clarity in your degree, one module
at a time.

My interest spans the breadth of computer science, making me a well-rounded and
knowledgeable guide in this field. I have experience tutoring Computer
Architecture, Computer Programming (in languages listed next), and Systems
Programming. Additionally, I'm also comfortable teaching Database Systems,
Probability Theory, Mathematical Logic, Computational Complexity, Functional
Programming, Lambda Calculus, Type Theory, Computer Aided Formal Verification,
and Operating Systems. All of these are courses I've taken at Oxford University
and receiving 70%+ in, leading to my First Class Honours.

The programming languages I'm comfortable with are: C, Python, Go, Lisp
(Scheme), assembly (x86, ARM, MIPS), Javascript, C++, SQL, Visual Basic, Rust,
Java, Scala, Haskell, Shell, Verilog, and more.

My tutoring style is centred around problem-solving. This approach is rooted in
the belief that the best way to learn is by doing. Instead of simply lecturing
or providing direct answers, I guide my students through the process of
identifying, dissecting, and solving problems on their own. This method not only
helps them understand the underlying concepts but also equips them with the
critical thinking and problem-solving skills that are essential in the field of
computer science.

In each session, we start by discussing a specific problem or concept. I then
encourage the student to propose potential solutions or approaches. As they work
through the problem, I provide guidance and feedback, helping them to refine
their approach and understand where they might have gone wrong. This
interactive, hands-on approach ensures that the student is actively engaged in
the learning process rather than passively receiving information.

Moreover, I tailor my teaching style to each individual student. I understand
that everyone has a unique way of learning, and I strive to adapt my methods to
suit their needs. Whether a student prefers visual aids, real-world examples, or
detailed explanations, I am flexible and responsive in my approach.

About me: I earned my First Class BA in Mathematics and Computer Science from
Oxford in 2017 and subsequently honed my skills as a software engineer. There, I
was part of a dedicated team that worked to modernize a complex and outdated
data analytics program, adapting it for the web.

After facing a sudden health setback in 2022, which required a pause and
introspection, I understood my desire to step out on my own, leaving my job in
June 2023. This decision aligns with my commitment to personal and professional
growth and a drive to share my expertise with others.

I have been really enjoing tutoring this (2023-24) academic year. I have already
taught over 50 hours, working with 10 students to help improve their
understanding. I've also been receiving professional coaching to ensure that I'm
continuously improving my teaching method and that I'm maximising my benefit to
each student every session.

If my background and approach resonate with you, feel free to reach out. Whether
it's a discussion about potential tutoring or just a chat about the vast world
of computer science, you can arrange a [lesson through Superprof](https://www.superprof.co.uk/reach-clarity-your-computer-science-degree-with-online-tuition-from-oxford-grad.html), or email me
directly at [christina@octocurious.com](mailto:christina@octocurious.com).

I provide a _free_ initial meeting.

I can't wait to meet you!

_Christina O'Donnell_
